Topic: Language bound by region or religion.

Language is a way to express one’s thoughts, it enables one to make one’s opinions pervade through to the outside world, it unleashes one’s emotions and is a fundamental attribute one a human being, which distinguishes humans from other living beings.
In the present world though, some denizens have employed this myriad tool of language in ways adversely affecting these same humans, for whom language was supposed to be the greatest gift.
Language today is used to represent religions, for instance Hindi would indicate Hinduism whereas Urdu would denote Muslims. Again, language has also been used as pertaining to regions like Bengali for the Bongs, Telugu for the southern counterparts to name a few.
Language is a way to express oneself. It is all pervading. It was meant to facilitate interaction between humans, to empower humans to put across their ideas to other and ultimately to UNITE them.
But the aforesaid employment of language to create rifts and dissensions between people is totally unwarranted, unnerving and without any justification. Should a Sikh want to speak Bengali he should be most welcome, as also a Hindu who wants to master and communicate in Urdu. Educational institutions should actively promote the grit and integrity of all languages. It should be deeply instilled in the students that all languages were created with the sole aim to bridge gaps instead of widening them. What differs is just the alphabet and the syntax that different languages use. And holistic education should promote the equality of all languages and the fact that it is a matter of pride to have a flair in any language be it English, Swahili, Bengali or Urdu. Language expresses the fact that one belongs to a species called Homo Sapiens and not that one is Muslim or Hindu or Bengali or Punjabi.
One can choose to express oneself in any language depending on one’s personal inclination and demeanour. One should think of language as a spontaneous expression of self ,an unboxing of the inner potential and of essentially establishing connections with fellow humans. Language should be free like the river which flows on its own course across cities and countries powerful yet graceful and lithe linking millions and empowering many more.

