Cryptocurrency is basically a digitalised version of the age-old system of paper-based currency. Just as the barter system was preceded by the concept of using specialised currencies, the concept of paper currency can be said to preceded by the concept of cryptocurrency, it can be treated as the digital counterpart of the paper-based currency note prevalent now wherein detailed encryption and decryption is used to generate currency, transfer that currency and keep the entire flow in motion.
The major point of difference is that there is no particular agency which determines how the currency is to be generated, or how to regulate the transfer of funds or how to channelize that fund. But all this is done by encryption techniques and simultaneous decryption techniques. Machines and algorithms along with the implementation of data analytics and machine learning run the entire process independently of a central bank or authority. A group of people who agree to work as a community and accept the use of certain denominations and values and can actually support each other in sustaining the entire system of fund generation, transfer and channelizing can form a cryptocurrency. It is a digital medium for exchanges, it is secured by end to end encryption and decryption. It is quite decentralised, comes with a lot of independence is very distributed and peer to peer. It also does not reveal one’s estates and wealth. The information is not susceptible to government knowledge as in the case of a central bank.
The problems initially connected with the implementation of cryptocurrency have now been solved by some anonymous data scientist in the wake of the financial crisis on America in 2008 leading to the establishment of Bitcoin as the first fully working cryptocurrency. Many other cryptocurrencies have also come up like Ethereum and are collectively referred to as Altcoins.
About 15% of the world’s money is in the form of cash while the remaining are maintained in the form of records. While the bank can be compared to a single centralised register, wherein a single copy of the records is available which if manipulated, the entire data gets corrupted. There are therefore major trust issues involved. But in a cryptocurrency, it is as if multiple copies of the same register are circulated to individuals around the world. If one of them is corrupted the others are still available with correct data and one can definitely go with the majority and still retrieve the correct data thereby resolving mutual distrust. It provides much more security than a single bank computer containing all records with no other copy. Moreover an individual does not get adversely affected as in the case of USA where citizens were affected due to the callous giving of debts by the banks. The government decided to print currency notes and give it to the banks which in turn brought down the value of the dollar affecting innocent citizens in 2008.
Thus, cryptocurrency if correctly and effectively implemented without unprecedented breach of rules can pose to be a major solution to many financial problems currently faced.
Thanks!
