NAME:Shalini Mukhopadhyay
WEST BENGAL, KOLKATA, INDIA.
ID NUMBER:180645
SUSTAINABLE EXPLORATION CHALLENGE.
GREENHOUSE:
LUNAR CUBICLE:
TEAM:
The team comprises of a sole member which is me. I am currently an undergraduate student pursuing a Btech in Electrical Engineering in the INDIAN INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY KHARAGPUR. 
As of now there are no sponsors or distributors or companies aiding me. Inspiration I have received are from the Space Technology Society(SPATS) in the college. 


IDEA:
The idea is to build a lunar cubicle to facilitate plant growth on the moon.
PARTS:
1.Main compartment of about 30-50 centimeter made of U.V. resistant HDPE sheet with polycarbonate, ABS, UHMW and acetal.
2.The bottom of the main compartment will be open to provide exposure to lunar soil.
3.The upper part of the compartment will be filled with earth soil.
4. There will be a culture compartment to culture anaerobic bacteria(obligates,aerotolerant and facultative) which have been implanted with genes from nitrogen fixing organisms to fix nitrogen which is not available in the moon regolith.
5.There will be an electrolytic chamber for breaking water into hydrogen and oxygen for combustion in the heating compartment to release carbon-dioxide for photosynthesis by burnig dead plant and human remains which will accumulate.
6.There will be a waste chamber to effectively use human faeces and other organic matter such as rotten and dead plant parts , decayed animal carcasses and plant droppings and culture this using the GMO bacteria to produce nitrogen.(also other waste which result in a civilisation).
7.Optic fibres will be used to transmit sunlight to the cubicle (which will be buried underground to protect from U.V. rays) to run the solar panels to generate heat for combustion and also to provide solar energy to the plant for photosynthesis.
8.Magnetic stirrer and blades will be rotated at a great speed to create air for the plant.
9. The solar panels and heater will melt ice and heat cold water on moon to enable photosynthesis.
10.The earth soil will be highly fertilised and with all organic matter to initiate initial growth.
11. an earthworm chamber containing earthworms(oxygen supply from electrolysis)to churn the soil and help in decay and humus addition.
CROPS TO GROW:
varieties of rice, wheat, gram which require less nitrogen.
bajra,jowar and ragi which can withstand tough conditions better.
weeds which on death will add organic matter to the soil.
vegetables like carrots and tomatoes which have already been grown on moon.
Technologies:
BACTERIA culture and DNA transplant.
Solar panel.(photovoltaicity and photolysis).
Electrolysis of water.(electrolytic cell)



UTILISATION OF THE AWARD:
I would like to use the award ,if i get it, to further progress my idea which is currently in a preliminary stage, to build a team, to get technical expertise and much more know-how on the matter of culturing bacteria. I think the use of genetically modified bacteria to synthesise nitrogen would really help to grow crops on the moon as the lack of nitrogen in the lunar regolith is a major problem. 
Also the use of pill bugs gene in bacteria would solve the problem of the presence of excess heavy metals in the lunar regolith. 
The use of the Farmer's Friend the earthworm would be helpful in replenishing organic humus in the soil.
The award would help me to integrate other interested students , build a full-fledged team and build a first model of the lunar cubicle after acquiring the required technical assisstance and filling the missing gaps.
Thank you.
Your's faithfully:
Shalini mukhopadhyay
