As his body shook periodically in jerks, his heart was palpitating, the palpitations increasing with time and he was sweating profusely. He had propped his eyebrows and was peering through his de-shaped glasses. It took him all his effort to keep his drooping eyes from closing, his dishevelled white hair matted on his forehead with sweat. But today was different. The physical anguish had increased manifold times it was worsening with every second, but now in his mind he was experiencing an euphoria, an utopian bliss which he had not once experienced in the last twenty five years. Tears rolled down his creased cheeks as Colonel Ramsen Kamte painfully turned the last of the yellow pages of the diary he had written when he was growing from a playful and restless boy to a man of responsibility and bearing.
As he had opened the first page earlier, he had seen scrawled in big half-formed letters the words RAMSEN KAMTE, 26th August 1950. He could then see himself, a lanky and tall boy of fourteen in a ramshackle mud hut on the borders of Rajasthan stirring the dal in an earthen pot over a stove of bricks and twigs. As he fanned the steam which accumulated over the pot, his ailing mother cackled in a frail voice from the room inside. He had run to her side and held up the small pot by her bed to her mouth. She had coughed, spat blood and gasped for breath. He, not knowing what to do had dashed about the house in a frenzy, got her the matka of water and then frantically dashed outside to summon the neighbours for help.
He had run barefoot to the house of the Sarpanch and hurled himself at his feet. Moments later when they had reached his house, his mother had become very tranquil and still. She had forced a faint smile and as her strength was slowly ebbing and the pallor going from her face, she had put out a trembling hand, which he had clutched desperately. Then muttering feebly ‘Bhagwan tera raksha kare Ramu’, she had unobtrusively and quietly ended her thirty-year life. That evening as he had stood seeing the flames engulf her body, he had realised how distorted that face had become with the stringent suffering over the past one month, the pain of poverty for thirty years and an estranged husband for fifteen. That day the Sarpanch had patted his head and left him home in the evening. Up till then he hadn’t shed a single tear but as the door had closed behind the sarpanch, he had felt the terrible pangs of loneliness as his mother had been his only family since his father had deserted them when he was two, he could hold back no longer and sprawling on the floor, he had sobbed uncontrollably his body shaking tremendously. But crying could not have filled the void his mother’s death had created nor could water, the only thing he could procure without a price from the broken well fill the void in his stomach. And so two days later with hunger gnawing inside and his eyes dizzy with tears, with only 10 rupees and his mother’s picture, he had got on a train which would carry him to Kashmir where he could train to join the army on the advice of the Sarpanch who had come to reclaim the land which he had leased to his mother fifteen years back. As the train left the station, he had looked back at the remote station of a cloistered Rajasthani village, his birthplace and where his mother had breathed her last and he had wondered if he would ever see it again.
The clam air and pungent smell of medicine of the hospital seemed to swirl about Colonel Ramsen in a mist and his sight was getting hazy as he had flipped the page. Nostalgia and grief gripped his heart as he remembered the two years that ensued, the countless sleepless nights, the physical torture inflicted by the army, the loathing in his heart, the times he had cried uncontrollably clutching his mother’s picture, the harsh treatment meted out to the young soldiers, the warmth of his fellow jawans, and the dal served which tasted like his mother’s. He hadn’t had it then in quite a while since his mother fell sick.
21st December 1952. After two and a half years of arduous struggle and training the lanky and frail boy had transformed into a well-built Jawan on the borders of Srinagar. He had learned to tolerate the nauseating and gory sight of blood and the obnoxious stench of modern chemical warfare which had given him nightmares and made him throw up in the beginning. He would still sleep with his mother’s picture and though he could barely make her out in the soiled and creased picture, it would give him strength and peace when he held it against his chest. He still missed her terribly but then he had known that there was no use talking about his pain as very few among his commanders were sympathetic to the woes of a poor illiterate seventeen-year old boy from a small village in Rajasthan India and among his battalion most of the others had  had even more pathetic stories to say. So, he had resorted to keeping his mother’s picture in a small nook in the wall in the tent folding his hand before her every time he went out.
As the colonel had remembered the days he had spent at the army, he had even then panicked and trembled. Being of a naturally gentle disposition he had never been able to come to terms with the fact that he would have to wring the life out of a fellow human being but in the face of hunger, adversity , self-defence and most importantly of duty and obligance to his country, he had with shaking hands pressed the trigger many a times, he had winced while mowing down civilians, he had unwillingly planted bombs and shells and had turned away while cities burst into ashes in front of his eyes and the air was heavy with smoke and piteous wailing. Amidst his irresoluteness and mental anguish at his unwillingly committed gory deeds his sole consolation had been his mother’s voice ringing in his ears, ‘Watan ke age kuch nahi’.
He smiled wanly when he remembered how his comrades had once made cake on his birthday with bread, sugar, water and cherry, the mesmerising beauty of Kashmir, the rays of the sun as they ricocheted from off the Dal lake, the dal-batti- churma he had so longed for since leaving Rajasthan, the rosy cheeked, blue-eyed girls he had secretly watched from behind the trees and his limbs felt free in spite of the various knobs and syringes penetrating them.
The Colonel wiped the sweat and tears from his brow as he reminisced the clam metal barrel of the gun against his chin on wintry days as he stood vigil over his country, he remembered how his dearest comrade had perished before his own eyes blood soaking through his Army Batch pinned on his chest a martyr for the country on the very day the two of them had turned eighteen, he remembered the dismay and helplessness he had experienced that very moment, a boy of eighteen hair ruffled, clothes in tattered rags flailing about him, blood trickling from the wound on his forehead as he had desperately tried to revive his friend. He felt a gush of emotions surging inside him as he remembered how his friend’s lifeless face had hurt him more than his physical extortions. That day as he had sat weeping by his friend’s body in the fading rays of the sun he had realised that he had lost all that he had loved, his mother, his village, his friend and his internal peace and solitude. He had suddenly looked at the vast expanse of hills and snow around him and as he had stumbled to his feet, the gun had clattered to the ground from his arms. That night as he had buried his friend in the snow, he had put his gun beside his friend as well. And he had smiled in the light of the dawn as he felt a great weight lift from his head with the realisation that he was one with the universe and the gun could not hold him back any longer.
And then suddenly the diary fell on the floor with a thud. He could feel his soul and essence leaving his body but he felt no fear. What he felt now was euphoria, an utopian mirth as his hand fell limp by his side. He was going to be reconciled with his mother.

